[ Announcer ]
IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C.,
JUDEAN CAPTIVES IN BABYLON...
WROTE THE FIRST EDITION
OF THE HEBREW BIBLE.
AFTER THEY RETURNED
TO JERUSALEM, THIS NEW BOOK
WOULD DEFINE THE JUDEAN PEOPLE,
GIVING THEM A SENSE
OF WHAT WAS RIGHT
AND WHAT WAS WRONG.
BUT THEN THEY WOULD
BE FACED WITH A CHOICE:
GIVE UP THEIR FAITH
OR FIGHT TO DEFEND IT.
[ Man Talking In Hebrew ]
NO THREAT WOULD
PROVE MORE DIRE...
THAN WHEN
ALEXANDER THE GREAT...
AND THE GREEKS
SWEPT THROUGH THE MIDDLE EAST,
BRINGING WITH THEM
THE MOST EXCITING CULTURE
THE WORLD HAD EVER SEEN.
BUT JUDAISM WOULD NOT DIE.
IT WOULD INSTEAD BE TRANSFORMED
BY THE NEW BELIEF...
THAT THE BIBLE
WAS NOT JUST A BOOK,
BUT A DIVINE TESTAMENT
AUTHORED BY GOD HIMSELF,
AND THAT THOSE WHO
WERE FAITHFUL TO GOD WOULD BE
REWARDED IN AN AFTERLIFE.
FAITH IN THIS NEW JUDAISM
WOULD BECOME SO STRONG...
THAT THE JEWS WOULD BECOME
THE FIRST PEOPLE IN HISTORY
WILLING TO FIGHT...
AND DIE FOR THEIR RELIGION
AND THEIR GOD.
IN 538 B.C.,
THE PERSIANS CONQUERED BABYLON.
[ Camels Braying ]
THEN THE PERSIAN KING FREED ALL
OF THE BABYLONIANS' CAPTIVES.
ONE PEOPLE HE ENCOURAGED
TO RETURN HOME...
WERE THE JUDEANS.
[ Man ]
CYRUS, KING OF PERSIA,
SAYS THIS:
"YAHWEH, THE GOD OF HEAVEN,
HAS GIVEN ME ALL THE KINGDOMS
OF THE EARTH...
"AND HAS APPOINTED ME
TO BUILD HIM A TEMPLE
IN JERUSALEM,
"IN JUDAH.
"WHOEVER AMONG YOU BELONGS
TO THE FULL TALLY
OF HIS PEOPLE,
"MAY HIS GOD BE WITH HIM.
"LET HIM GO UP TO JERUSALEM,
IN JUDAH, AND BUILD THE TEMPLE
OF YAHWEH,
GOD OF ISRAEL."
[ Narrator ]
BUT RETURNING TO A LAND
THEIR GRANDPARENTS...
HAD LEFT DECADES BEFORE
WAS A DAUNTING CHALLENGE.
AND MANY JEWS WHO HAD
MADE SUCCESSFUL LIVES
FOR THEMSELVES...
REMAINED IN BABYLON.
[ Camels Braying ]
IT WAS THE ADVENTUROUS
AND THE DEEPLY RELIGIOUS...
WHO WERE DRAWN TO JERUSALEM
TO REBUILD THE TEMPLE.
[ Men Chattering ]
AS SOON AS THE EXILES
ARRIVED IN JERUSALEM,
WORK ON THE SECOND TEMPLE BEGAN.
THE BOOK OF EZRA
DESCRIBED THE EXCITEMENT
THAT FILLED THE AIR.
[ Man ]
THE PEOPLE CONTRIBUTED MONEY
FOR THE MASONS AND CARPENTERS...
AND FOOD, DRINK AND OIL
FOR THE MEN FROM SIDON
AND TYR...
WHO BROUGHT CEDAR WOOD
FROM LEBANON BY SEA, FOR WHICH
CYRUS, KING OF PERSIA,
HAD GIVEN PERMISSION.
THE PRIESTS IN THEIR ROBES
STOOD FORWARD WITH TRUMPETS...
AND THE LEVITES WITH CYMBALS
TO PRAISE YAHWEH.
[ Cymbals Crash ]
THEN ALL THE PEOPLE RAISED
A MIGHTY SHOUT OF PRAISE...
SINCE THE FOUNDATIONS OF
THE TEMPLE HAD NOW BEEN LAID.
MANY OF THE OLDER PRIESTS
AND HEADS OF FAMILIES WHO
HAD SEEN THE FIRST TEMPLE...
WEPT.
BUT MANY OTHERS
SHOUTED ALOUD FOR JOY.
[ Low Chattering ]
[ Narrator ] BUT THE TEMPLE
WAS THE ONLY SOURCE OF JOY
FOR THE RETURNEES.
[ Nickering ]
THE REST OF THEIR WORLD
WAS GRIM.
THE ONLY JUDEANS
THE BABYLONIANS HAD
LEFT BEHIND...
WERE THE POOREST
OF THE PEASANTS.
NOW, THEIR DESCENDANTS WERE
ON THE VERGE OF STARVATION...
[ Mule Braying ]
AS THEY STRUGGLED
TO EKE OUT A LIVING
FROM THE LAND.
THE ONLY OTHERS LIVING NEARBY
WERE PEOPLES WHO HAD BEEN
FORCIBLY RESETTLED IN ISRAEL...
AFTER THE NORTHERN TRIBES
WERE EXILED.
THESE FOREIGNERS
WOULD DO ALL THEY COULD...
TO KEEP THE RETURNEES
FROM GAINING A FOOTHOLD
IN JERUSALEM,
FOR THEY VIEWED THEM AS RIVALS
FOR CONTROL OF THE REGION.
[ Mule Braying ]
[ Wind Whistling ]
BUT THE WORST BURDEN
FOR THE RETURNEES TO BEAR...
WAS THAT THEIR ANCESTRAL HOME,
JERUSALEM, WAS A WASTELAND.
[ Zevit ]
THE CITY OF JERUSALEM
IS STILL IN RUINS.
THE PEOPLE WHO COME BACK TO LIVE
IN THE AREA OF JERUSALEM...
GO AND INHABIT
THOSE STONE BUILDINGS THAT
WERE LEFT STANDING...
FROM THE TIME
OF THE BABYLONIAN DESTRUCTION.
SO YOU HAVE HALF OF THE CITY
WHERE PEOPLE ARE LIVING
IN RUINED HOMES...
AND THEN ANOTHER HALF
OF THE CITY WHERE
NOBODY IS LIVING...
AND THE BUILDINGS ARE STILL
STANDING EMPTY.
IT WOULD'VE BEEN
SOMETHING DEPRESSING.
AND AFTER A WHILE, ALL HOPE
WOULD'VE GONE OUT
OF THE PEOPLE,
AND PEOPLE WOULD HAVE
SETTLED DOWN TO A LIFE
OF DISCONTENT.
[ Narrator ]
SOON, EVEN THE BUILDING OF
THE TEMPLE SLOWED TO A CRAWL,
CRIPPLED BY CONFLICT
BETWEEN THE RETURNEES
AND THE FOREIGNERS.
[ Hammering ]
THE RUTHLESS UPROOTING
OF GROUPS LIKE THE JUDEANS,
WHO WERE THEN RESETTLED WITH
PEOPLES OF ENTIRELY DIFFERENT
ETHNICITY AND RELIGION,
HAD LED TO TURMOIL
THROUGHOUT THE MIDDLE EAST.
IN JUDEA, LAW AND ORDER
HAD COMPLETELY BROKEN DOWN.
BY CONVINCING THE PERSIANS
THAT THE JEWS WERE PLANNING
TO REBEL,
THE FOREIGNERS WON AN ORDER
SUSPENDING THE REBUILDING
OF THE TEMPLE.
EVENTUALLY, THE JEWS
RECEIVED PERMISSION TO CONTINUE,
BUT WERE TOO POOR
AND TOO APATHETIC
TO FINISH THE WORK.
EIGHTY YEARS
AFTER THEY ARRIVED,
THE RETURN HOME OF THE EXILES
SEEMED LIKE A HORRIBLE MISTAKE.
[ Chattering ]
BUT THEN A REMARKABLE MAN
ARRIVED IN JERUSALEM.
HIS NAME WAS EZRA, AND HE HAD
BEEN SENT BY THE PERSIAN KING...
TO RESTORE ORDER
TO JERUSALEM.
[ Man ]
ARTAXERXES, KING OF KINGS,
TO THE PRIEST EZRA:
"GREETINGS.
NOW HERE ARE MY ORDERS.
"YOU ARE BEING SENT
TO JUDAH AND JERUSALEM.
"YOU ARE TO
APPOINT MAGISTRATES AND SCRIBES
TO ADMINISTER JUSTICE...
"FOR ALL WHO KNOW THE LAW
OF YOUR GOD.
AND YOU ARE TO TEACH IT
TO ALL WHO DO NOT KNOW IT."
[ Zevit ]
EZRA IS A SCRIBE
AND A PRIEST.
ONE DIDN'T BECOME A SCRIBE
BECAUSE HE WAS BORN A SCRIBE;
ONE BECAME A SCRIBE
BY DINT OF TALENT,
INTELLIGENCE, LITERACY
AND CREATIVITY.
SO NOW COMES BACK TO JERUSALEM
A MAN OF RANK...
AND PRIVILEGE
AND POLITICAL POWER.
[ Narrator ]
EZRA HAD COME FROM BABYLON,
WHERE JEWISH SCRIBES...
HAD WRITTEN THE FIRST EDITION
OF THE HEBREW BIBLE.
BUT THE MOSTLY
ILLITERATE RETURNEES
KNEW NOTHING ABOUT THE BOOK...
OR ITS STORIES OR ITS LAWS.
NOW EZRA HAD A SURPRISE
FOR THEM.
[ Friedman ]
EZRA
TO JERUSALEM EMPTY-HANDED.
HE CAME WITH A BOOK,
AND THAT BOOK
WAS ALMOST CERTAINLY THE TORAH,
THE FIRST FIVE BOOKS
OF THE BIBLE IN THE FORM
THAT WE HAVE IT TODAY.
AND HE SAID TO THE PEOPLE,
"THIS IS WHAT WE'RE ABOUT,
AND THIS IS HOW YOU MUST LIVE."
[ Narrator ]
IN WHAT WOULD PROVE TO BE ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT EVENTS...
IN HISTORY, EZRA GATHERED ALL
OF THE PEOPLE OF JUDEA
TOGETHER...
IN A SQUARE NEAR THE TEMPLE
AND READ THEM THE FIRST
FIVE BOOKS OF THE BIBLE:
THE TORAH.
[ Man Reading In Hebrew ]
[ Friedman ]
THAT MAKES EZRA
KIND OF A NEW MOSES.
HE'S THE LAWGIVER.
HE'S THE ONE WHO STANDS UP
AND TELLS THE PEOPLE,
"WELL, YOU HAVEN'T
KNOWN EXACTLY THE RIGHT THING
TO DO UNTIL NOW,
"BUT FROM THIS DAY FORWARD,
YOU WILL ALWAYS KNOW
THE RIGHT THING TO DO.
AND IT'S IN THIS SCROLL
RIGHT HERE."
[ Man ]
YOU ARE THE CHILDREN
OF YAHWEH YOUR GOD.
YOU MUST TAKE ALL THE TITHES
OF YOUR HARVEST FOR THE YEAR...
AND GATHER THEM TOGETHER
IN YOUR COMMUNITY.
THEN THE FOREIGNER, THE ORPHAN
AND THE WIDOW LIVING
IN YOUR COMMUNITY...
WILL COME AND EAT.
I'M GIVING YOU THIS COMMAND:
ALWAYS BE OPENHANDED
WITH YOUR BROTHER...
AND WITH ANYONE
IN YOUR COUNTRY
WHO IS IN NEED AND POOR.
REMEMBER THAT YOU
WERE ONCE A SLAVE IN EGYPT,
AND YAHWEH YOUR GOD
REDEEMED YOU.
THAT IS WHY I AM
GIVING YOU THIS ORDER.
[ Man Reciting Text ]
[ Friedman ]
THE CENTRAL POSSESSION
OF THE JEWS IS THE TORAH,
AND IT BECAME
THE CENTRAL POSSESSION
OF THE JEWS THAT DAY,
THE DAY THAT EZRA
HAD IT READ IN JERUSALEM.
BEFORE THAT,
THEY HAD PARTS OF THE TORAH.
BUT THAT DAY,
THEY HAD THE WHOLE THING.
AND FOR THE TWO AND A HALF
THOUSAND YEARS SINCE THEN,
THAT'S BEEN
THE GOVERNING FORCE OF THE JEWS,
THE HIGHEST IDEAL.
ALL OF IT-- THE HISTORY,
THE LAWS, THE PRINCIPLES
OF TORAH--
ALL COME OUT
OF THAT MOMENT IN HISTORY.
[ Narrator ]
AFTER THE CEREMONY
IN WHICH EZRA READ THE TORAH,
THE PEOPLE OF JUDEA
WERE ASKED TO SIGN A CONTRACT
AGREEING TO LIVE...
ACTO THE LAWS
OF THE BIBLE.
THE DOCUMENT THEY SIGNED
WAS REVOLUTIONARY,
PROOF THAT THE ISRAELITES' GOD
CARED NOT JUST ABOUT KINGS
AND PRIESTS,
BUT ABOUT FARMERS AND WEAVERS,
MOTHERS AND FATHERS.
[ Wolpe ]
THIS IS A PROFOUNDLY DEMOCRATIC
RELIGIOUS REVOLUTION.
WHAT EZRA DECLARED THAT DAY
IS THERE IS NO SECRET KNOWLEDGE
IN ISRAEL.
IN TRADITIONS
ALL OVER THE WORLD, THERE WERE
ALWAYS MYSTERY PRIESTS...
AND RITES
THAT OTHER PEOPLE COULDN'T KNOW.
BUT THE TORAH IS FULL
OF THE EXACT RITES THAT THE
PRIESTS FOLLOW IN THE TEMPLE.
AND WHAT THAT MEANS IS
EVERY ISRAELITE CAN KNOW...
WHAT THE PRIESTS KNOW,
WHAT THE TEACHERS KNOW.
GOD'S REVELATION
IS FOR ANYONE WHO CHOOSES
TO UNDERSTAND IT.
NOT ONE REVELATION
TO THE PROPHET
AND ONE TO THE PRIEST...
AND THEN A LOWER ORDER OF
REVELATION TO THE AVERAGE PERSON
IN THE STREET.
BUT RATHER,
EVERYONE CAN SEEK GOD. EVERYONE
CAN UNDERSTAND GOD'S TEACHING.
[ Narrator ]
EZRA'S CALL FOR ALL JEWS TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE COVENANT...
REVITALIZED JERUSALEM.
THE TEMPLE, ESPECIALLY,
WAS TRANSFORMED...LEM.
FOR THE TORAH REQUIRED THAT
THE TEMPLE PLAY A CENTRAL ROLE
IN JEWISH LIFE.
[ Man ]
YOU MUST NOT PUT THE FIRSTBORN
OF YOUR HERD TO WORK...
OR SHEAR THE FIRSTBORN
OF YOUR FLOCK.
YOU MUST EAT IT,
YOU AND YOUR HOUSEHOLD,
EACH YEAR, IN THE PRESENCE
OF YAHWEH, YOUR GOD.
[ Netter ]
DURING THE TIME
OF THE SECOND TEMPLE,
THERE WAS ONLY ONE PLACE
WHERE SACRED TIME
AND SACRED SPACE CAME TOGETHER.
AND IT WAS THE WHOLE SPECTACLE
AND STRUCTURE AND RITUAL
OF THE SACRIFICES...
THAT WAS THE VEHICLE
BY WHICH PEOPLE CAME CLOSE
TO GOD.
SO IF YOU LIVED IN THE NORTH
OF ISRAEL AND IT CAME TIME
TO CELEBRATE PASSOVER,
YOU WANTED TO BRING AN ANIMAL,
ONE OF YOUR ANIMALS,
TO THE TEMPLE.
AND YOU WOULD SELL YOUR ANIMAL,
TAKE THAT MONEY, MAKE
THE PILGRIMAGE TO JERUSALEM,
BUY ANOTHER ANIMAL
AND BRING IT TO THE TEMPLE.
AND YOU CAN IMAGINE THAT,
WITH ALL OF THAT PREPARATION,
WHAT THAT MOMENT MUST'VE
BEEN LIKE FOR A PENITENT...
WHO CAME ALL THAT DISTANCE,
WENT THROUGH ALL THAT TROUBLE.
THAT MOMENT FINALLY CAME
WHEN HLAID HIS HANDS
ON THIS ANIMAL...
AND ESTABLISHED IT
AS, "THIS IS MY GIFT TO GOD.
THIS IS WHAT I'M GOING TO EAT
ALONG WITH GOD,
IN GOD'S PRESENCE."
IMAGINE THE POWER OF THAT.
[ Narrator ] IN ADDITION
TO ITS LAWS ABOUT HOW
HUMAN BEINGS SHOULD TREAT GOD,
THE BIBLE HAD A GREAT DEAL
TO SAY ABOUT HOW HUMAN BEINGS
SHOULD TREAT EACH OTHER,
MAKING IT ONE OF
THE MOST SOPHISTICATED LAW BOOKS
IN THE ANCIENT WORLD.
AND YET, FOR A MAN
TO ADMINISTER LAWS THAT WERE
WRITTEN CENTURIES EARLIER...
WAS NOT AN EASY TASK.
ONE LAW FORBID JEWS
TO MARRY FOREIGNERS...
TO KEEP THEM
FROM WORSHIPPING FOREIGN GODS.
♪♪ [ Sitar, Drums ]
BUT IN THE TUMULTUOUS YEARS
SINCE THE RETURN,
MANY JUDEANS
HAD MARRIED FOREIGN WOMEN.
AFTER GREAT DELIBERATION,
EZRA DECIDED HE HAD NO CHOICE...
BUT TO ORDER THESE MEN
TO DIVORCE THEIR WIVES.
[ Man ]
YOU HAVE COMMITTED TREASON
BY MARRYING FOREIGN WOMEN.
YOU HAVE ADDED
TO THE SIN OF ISRAEL.
BUT NOW GIVE THANKS TO YAHWEH,
THE GOD OF YOUR ANCESTORS,
AND DO HIS WILL...
BY SEPARATING
FROM YOUR FOREIGN WIVES.
[ Kugel ]
EZRA'S CONCEPTION OF
THE JEWISH PEOPLE...
WAS AS A HOLY PEOPLE.
ZERA KODESH,
HE CALLED THEM.
AND THAT WAS IMPORTANT TO HIM
PRECISELY BECAUSE THEY LIVED,
NOT ALONE,
BUT AMONG OTHER PEOPLES.
SO IT WAS VERY, VERY IMPORTANT
TO CREATE A KIND
OF RELIGIOUS STATE...
APART FROM
THE ACTUAL PHYSICAL STATE.
THE RELIGIOUS STATE
WOULD BE THE JEWISH PEOPLE...
MARRYING THEIR OWN KIND...
AND CONSTITUTING,
THEREFORE, THE HOLY SEED.
[ Narrator ] THE DIVORCING
OF FOREIGN WIVES, WITH WHICH
SOME JEWS BITTERLY DISAGREED,
WAS A SIGN
OF THE CHALLENGES TO COME.
THE BIBLE OFTEN SPOKE
IN METAPHORS,
AND FROM THE TIME
EZRA MADE IT PUBLIC,
PEOPLE WOULD ARGUE FIERCELY
ABOUT ITS TRUE MEANING.
[ Kugel ] THERE ARE ALL KINDS
OF SOCIETIES THAT
HAVE DISAGREEMENTS,
AND CERTAINLY THAT IS LIKELY
TO BE THE CASE WITH A GROUP
OF PEOPLE RETURNING FROM EXILE.
THEY ALL HAVE THEIR VISION
OF WHAT SOCIETY OUGHT TO BE
ONCE WE GET BACK THERE.
BUT PRECISELY
BECAUSE IT HAPPENED...
AMONG PEOPLE WHOSE EYES
WERE FOCUSED ON THE PAST, WHO
WERE IN THIS MODE OF RETURN,
MEANT THAT
THEIR DISAGREEMENTS WOULD
QUICKLY BECOME DISAGREEMENTS...
ABOUT THE TEXT
THAT TALKED ABOUT THAT PAST,
DISAGREEMENTS ABOUT SCRIPTURE.
AND THIS TRADITION,
AS IT WERE, OF DISAGREEING
ABOUT SCRIPTURE...
REALLY BECAME THE KIND
OF LEITMOTIF OF THE ENTIRE,
UH, POST-EXILIC PERIOD.
[ Narrator ] ONE OF
THE MOST IMPORTANT DISAGREEMENTS
WAS TRIGGERED BY A BOOK...
THAT DARED TO CHALLENGE
THE MESSAGE PUT FORTH BY THE
SCRIBES WHO EDITED THE BIBLE.
THE SCRIBES' EXPLANATION
OF JEWISH HISTORY...
WAS BASED ON THEIR BELIEF
THAT GOD WAS FAIR...
AND HE REWARDED THE GOOD
AND PUNISHED THE EVIL.
BUT A NEW BOOK,
WRITTEN AFTER THE RETURN,
ARGUED THAT GOD
DID NOT WORK THAT WAY AT ALL.
THE HERO OF THE BOOK,
A WEALTHY AND UPRIGHT MAN
NAMED JOB,
SUFFERED A SERIES
OF CATASTROPHES.
JOB'S CROPS
WERE DESTROYED BY DROUGHT,
HIS FLOCKS
KILLED BY DISEASE.
AND ALL 10
OF HIS CHILDREN DIED.
EN JOB'S OWN BODY
WAS RACKED BY ILLNESS.
AS HE SAT BY THE ROADSIDE,
MOURNING THE LOSS
OF ALL HE HELD DEAR,
IN SACK CLOTH AND ASHES,
♪♪♪♪ [ Chanting ]
JOB POSED ONE
OF LIFE'S GREAT QUESTIONS:
WHY IS IT THAT BAD PEOPLE
OFTEN PROSPER...
WHILE GOOD PEOPLE
OFTEN SUFFER?
[ Man ]
WHY ARE THE WICKED
ALLOWED TO LIVE,
GROW OLD
AND WIN PROSPERITY?
YET THEY HAD SAID TO GOD,
"AWAY FROM US. WE DO NOT
WANT TO KNOW YOUR WAYS."
I RESCUED POOR MEN
WHEN THEY CRIED, AND ORPHANS,
PEOPLE NONE WOULD HELP.
DESPERATE, RUINED MEN
WOULD BLESS ME,
AND I BROUGHT SONG
TO THE WIDOW'S HEART.
YET HORROR
HAS ROLLED OVER ME...
AND DRIVEN OFF MY DIGNITY
LIKE WIND.
MY WEALTH HAS VANISHED
LIKE A CLOUD,
AND NOW MY LIFE
IS SPILLING OUT OF ME.
I HOPED FOR GOOD,
GOT ONLY WRONG.
I HOPED FOR LIGHT,
GOT ONLY DARKNESS.
I GO ABOUT
IN SUNLESS GLOOM.
[ Schwartz ]
JOB SEEMS TO BE REACTING
TO THE VIEW...
THAT THERE IS BASICALLY
ONE POWERFUL, GOOD GOD
IN THE WORLD...
WHO CAN BE COUNTED ON
TO REWARD THE RIGHTEOUS
AND PUNISH THE WICKED.
THIS IS THE CENTRAL IDEA
OF MOST OF THE BIBLICAL BOOKS,
AND CERTAINLY OF ALL
OF THE BIBLICAL HISTORIES.
AND JOB IS REACTING
AGAINST THIS BY SAYING SIMPLY
THAT THIS IS NOT THE CASE,
THIS IS JUST NOT REALITY
AS WE KNOW IT.
REALITY DOESN'T
BEAR OUT THE THESIS
THAT GOD CONSISTENTLY...
REWARDS THE RIGHTEOUS
AND PUNISHES THE WICKED.
[ Narrator ] JOB DID NOT
EXPECT TO RECEIVE HIS REWARD FOR
BEING A GOOD MAN AFTER HE DIED.
INTO THE FOURTH CENTURY B.C.,
JUDEANS VIEWED THE BIBLE...
AS A BOOK ABOUT THEIR PAST,
NOT THEIR FUTURE.
AND FEW BELIEVED
IN AN AFTERLIFE.
[ Man ]
EVEN A TREE HAS HOPE.
IF YOU CUT I SPROUTS AGAIN.
BUT MAN--
WHEN HE WEARIES AND DIES,
WHEN A HUMAN GIVES OUT--
WHERE IS HE THEN?
WATER VANISHES FROM A LAKE.
RIVERS DRY UP, PARCHED.
AND MAN LIES DOWN
AND DOES NOT RISE.
[ Narrator ] THE PHILOSOPHY
OF JOB WOULD BECOME
A CRITICAL CHALLENGE TO JUDAISM.
IF THERE WAS NO REWARD
FOR BEING GOOD,
NO PUNISHMENT
FOR BEING BAD,
THEN WHY BOTHER
OBEYING GOD'S LAWS?
IT WAS A QUESTION THAT WOULD
PROVE EVEN MORE DIFFICULT
FOR JEWS TO ANSWER...
WHEN THE CHANCE AROSE
TO EMBRACE AN ENTIRELY NEW
AND EXCITING WAY OF LIFE.
IN THE FOURTH CENTURY B.C.,
A REMARKABLE PEOPLE
INVADED THE MIDDLE EAST.
THEY WERE THE GREEKS.
LED BY ONE OF
THE GREATEST GENERALS
IN HISTORY, ALEXANDER THE GREAT,
THE GREEKS WOULD
CONQUER THE WORLD,
FROM GREECE TO INDIA.
[ Horse Whinnying ]
BUT THERE WAS FAR MORE
TO THE GREEKS
THAN MILITARY PROWESS.
THE GREEKS HAD CREATED THE MOST
SOPHISTICATED CIVILIZATION
THE WORLD HAD EVER SEEN.
THEIR MAGNIFICENT ART
WAS INSPIRED BY A REVERENCE
FOR THE HUMAN BODY,
WHICH ALSO FOUND ITS EXPRESSION
IN THE ATHLETIC FEATS
ON DISPLAY...
IN THEIR OLYMPIC GAMES.
BUT THE GREEKS ALSO
REVERED THE MIND.
AND THEIR GREATEST THINKERS
WERE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE FLOWERING OF PHILOSOPHY,
SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS.
AS A RESULT,
HELLENIC ARCHITECTURE,
POLITICS AND ECONOMICS...
WERE CENTURIES AHEAD
OF THE OTHER PEOPLE'S
OF THE WORLD.
[ Horse Whinnying ]
FOR THE JEWS, THE TAKEOVER
OF MOST OF THE KNOWN WORLD
BY THE GREEKS...
WAS A THREAT MORE DIRE
THAN ANY A MERE ARMY COULD POSE.
[ Visotzky ]
WHEN THE GREEK WORLD
EXPANDED EVER EASTWARD,
ULTIMATELY THE JEWS OF THE LAND
OF ISRAEL FOUND THEMSELVES...
ALMOST LITERALLY
SMACK IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE HELLENISTIC EMPIRE.
WE WERE SURROUNDED
BY HELLENISTIC CULTURE,
AND WILLY-NILLY,
WE FOUND OURSELVES
BECOMING HELLENISTS.
THIS TRIGGERED
BOTH A GREAT ADVANCE
AND A GREAT STRUGGLE...
WITHIN THE JEWISH PEOPLE
FOR HOW WE WOULD IDENTIFY.
WOULD WE SIMPLY
SUCCUMB TO HELLENISM...
OR WOULD WE SOMEHOW
MAINTAIN OUR UNIQUE IDENTITY
AS A PEOPLE?
[ Narrator ] THE GREEKS
BROUGHT BRILLIANT INNOVATIONS
TO JUDEA...
THAT WOULD COMPLETELY
TRANSFORM DAILY LIFE.
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS,
THE PEOPLE OF THE MIDDLE EAST
HAD SURVIVED THROUGH BARTER.
BUT THE GREEKS
ENCOURAGED THE WIDESPREAD USE
OF MONEY.
SUDDENLY, MERCHANTS
THROUGHOUT THE REGION...
COULD SELL THEIR GOODS
TO ANYONE ANYWHERE.
[ Gafni ]
ECONOMICALLY,
THE WORLD WAS NOW OPEN.
PEOPLE START
LEAVING THEIR VILLAGES,
LEAVING THEIR TOWNS.
MOVING MORE THAN 20
OR 30 MILES FROM THEIR VIL
AND JEWS WERE NO DIFFERENT
FROM OTHERS.
THIS, I THINK,
WAS THE GREAT INNOVATION
OF THE HELLENISTIC WORLD:
MASS MOVEMENT.
[ Narrator ]
GREEK CULTURE OFFERED JEWS
EXCITING NEW OPPORTUNITIES.
THE MANY FARMERS
WHO PRODUCED OLIVE OIL...
COULD NOW SELL THEIR OIL
IN CITIES FROM ALEXANDRIA
TO ATHENS.
AS THIS TRADE FLOURISHED,
JEWISH COMMUNITIES
WERE ESTABLISHED...
IN CITIES
THROUGHOUT THE GREEK EMPIRE.
AND NEW GREEK CITIES
WERE BUILT IN JUDEA.
BUT AS THE GREEK INFLUENCE
IN JEWISH LIFE GREW,
MORE AND MORE JEWS WORRIED
THAT THEIR OWN CULTURE
WAS ABOUT TO BE CRUSHED.
[ Kirsch ] WE CAN
UNDERSTAND HOW THE ANCIENT JEWS
REGARDED HELLENISM...
SIMPLY BY REMINDING OURSELVES
HOW TRADITIONAL SOCIETIES...
AROUND THE WORLD
HAVE REGARDED THE COMING
OF AMERICAN CULTURE--
MOVIES, WESTERN STYLES
OF DRESS, WESTERN TECHNOLOGY.
IN OUR OWN TIMES,
WE HAVE SEEN HOW VIOLENTLY...
THE MORE TRADITIONAL ELEMENTS
OF ISLAM AND JUDAISM
AND CHRISTIANITY...
HAVE REGARDED THE MATERIALISTIC,
SECULAR CULTURE
OF THE WESTERN WORLD.
[ Bird Calling ]
[ Narrator ] AS THIS
REMARKABLE NEW CULTURE SWEPT
FROM ITS CRADLE IN GREECE...
ACROSS THE MIDDLE EAST,
DEVOUT JEWS FACED
A MONUMENTAL CHALLENGE.
HOW COULD JUDAISM,
WITH ITS FOCUS SIMPLY
ON BEING GOOD,
COMPETE WITH THE VIBRANT
AND EXCITING WAY OF LIFE
THE GREEKS HAD TO OFFER?
[ Wind Whistling ]
BUT THEN JUDAISM UNDERWENT
A REVOLUTIONARY TRANSFORMATION.
[ Man Talking In Hebrew ]
IT BEGAN
WITH A TEACHER WHO LIVED
IN THE SECOND CENTURY B.C....
NAMED BEN SIRA.
BEN SIRA WAS
DEEPLY INFLUENCED...
BY THE GREEK
PHILOSOPHICAL TRADITION
OF SOCRATES AND PLATO.
[ Man ]
HAPPY THE MAN WHO MEDITATES
ON WISDOM...
AND REASONS
WITH GOOD SENSE...
WHO STUDIES HER WAYS
IN HIS HEART
AND PONDERS HER SECRETS.
[ Speaking Hebrew ]
[ Gafni ] ONE CAN ALMOST
CATEGORIZE BEN SIRA...
AS BEING ONE OF
THE FIRST JEWISH PHILOSOPHERS--
THAT IS TO SAY,
A LOVER OF WISDOM.
AND MUCH OF THE BOOK OF BEN SIRA
IS DEVOTED TO THIS GREAT RESPECT
FOR WISDOM,
FOR LEARNING WISDOM, FOR
INSTITUTIONALIZING WISDOM...
WITHIN AN ACADEMY,
AND THIS IS SOMETHING
UNIQUELY GREEK.
[ Sermonizing ]
[ Narrator ] BEN SIRA'S
BRILLIANT INNOVATION WAS
TO APPLY THE GREEK TRADITION...
OF STUDY AND DEBATE
TO THE BIBLE.
HE BELIEVED
THAT IF HIS STUDENTS
STUDIED THE BIBLE'S STORY,
THEY WOULD LEARN MORE
ABOUT HOW TO LIVE
FROM MOSES...
THAN FROM SOCRATES.
[ Man ]
FROM MOSES,
HE PRODUCED A GENEROUS MAN...
WHO FOUND FAVOR IN THE EYES
OF ALL MANKIND.
BELOVED BY GOD AND MAN,
MOSES OF BLESSED MEMORY.
GOD ALLOWED HIM
TO HEAR HIS VOICE,
GAVE HIM THE COMMANDMENTS
FACE-TO-FACE,
THE LAW OF LIFE
AND KNOWLEDGE.
[ Moses Talking
In Hebrew ]
[ Kugel ]
BEN SIRA LOOKS AT THE STORIES
OF ABRAHAM OR MOSES,
AND FOR HIM,
THEY'RE NOT STORIES
ABOUT THE PAST.
HE REALLY
HAS THE MENTALITY OF A SAGE.
BUT ATTIME,
HE DID SOMETHING THAT
NO PREVIOUS SAGE HAD EVER DONE.
HE TALKED ABOUT SCRIPTURE.
HE REGARDED THE TORAH
AS NOTHING LESS...
THAN THE GREAT BOOK
OF DIVINE WISDOM.
AND SO HIS JOB AS A SAGE--
IN ORDER TO KNOW AS MUCH...
AS A PERSON CAN KNOW
ABOUT GOD'S WILL--
WASN'T WHAT
OTHER SAGES HAD DONE
OR HAD SEEN AS THEIR JOB,
NAMELY TO LOOK AT THE WORLD
AND DRAW LESSONS FROM IT--
BUT TO READ THE BOOK.
[ Narrator ]
IT WAS A NEW APPROACH
TO JUDAISM.
EZRA HAD
GIVEN THE PEOPLE THE TORAH
TO LIVE BY ITS LAWS.
BUT THANKS TO BEN SIRA
AND OTHERS LIKE HIM,
JEWS EAGER FOR AN ALTERNATIVE
TO GREEK CULTURE...
BEGAN STUDYING THE LIVES
OF THE BIBLE'S HEROES,
WISDOM
THEIR STORIES REVEALED.E DIVINE
AS THIS PRACTICE
BECAME MORE AND MORE WIDESPREAD,
A NEW IDEA AROSE...
THAT THE WRITERS OF THE BIBLE
RE DIVINELY INSPIRED,
AND THEREFORE,
EVERYTHING IN THE BIBLE
WAS TRUE.
[ Kugel ] THE IDEA OF
DIVINE INSPIRATION OF SCRIPTURE
SEEMS TO HAVE EMERGED...
ACTUALLY RATHER SLOWLY
AND PIECEMEAL.
THERE ARE MANY, MANY
BIBLICAL PROPHETS WHO SAY WHAT
THEY SAY IN THE NAME OF GOD.
"GOD TOLD ME TO SAY THIS,
AND HERE'S WHAT HE SAID."
BUT GRADUALLY,
AS TIME WENT ON, THIS NOTION...
OF THE DIVINE INSPIRATION
OF SCRIPTURE...
OR THE DIVINE AUTHORIZATION
CAME TO BE SPREAD
RATHER UNIFORMLY TO ALL PARTS
OF THE BIBLE.
[ Narrator ] THE GREEKS
MIGHT BE THE RICHEST AND
MIGHTIEST PEOPLE IN THE WORLD,
BUT DEVOUT JEWS
NOW HAD A POWERFUL WEAPON
OF THEIR OWN:
A BOOK THEY BELIEVED
WAS AUTHORED BY GOD HIMSELF...
THAT REVEALED
HOW HE WANTED THEM TO LIVE.
[ Man Speaking In Hebrew ]
BUT EXACTLY
WHAT GOD WAS REVEALING...
IN ANY PARTICULAR PASSAGE
OF THE BIBLE WAS OFTEN HARD
TO FIGURE OUT.
FOR NOW, MANY CENTURIES
AFTER IT WAS WRITTEN,
THE BIBLE'S MEANING
WAS OPEN TO INTERPRETATION.
[ Kugel ] PEOPLE
LIKED TO THINK OF THE JEWS
AS THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK,
BUT THEY WERE THE PEOPLE
OF THE INTERPRETATION
OF THE BOOK.
I GUESS THERE ARE VERY FEW TEXTS
NOWADAYS THAT YOU COULD SAY...
UNAMBIGUOUSLY JUST
MEAN ONE THING.
BUT WHEN IT COMES
TO A TEXT THAT WAS VERY OLD,
THAT IN SOME CASES USED WORDS
THAT WERE NO LONGER
UNDERSTOOD...
OR USED THEM IN A WAY THAT
WAS QUITE DIFFERENT FROM THE WAY
THOSE WORDS ARE USED NOWADAYS,
PEOPLE NEEDED,
ON THAT MOST BASIC LEVEL,
TO BE HELPED TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE TEXT MEANT.
[ Man Continues Speaking ]
[ Narrator ]
THE UNCERTAINTY OVER
WHAT THE BIBLE WAS SAYING...
GAVE ITS INTERPRETERS
TREMENDOUS FREEDOM.
SOON, NEW BELIEFS
WERE ARISING...
THAT WOULD SHAPE JUDAISM
AND CHRISTIANITY...
FOR THE NEXT TWO MILLENNIUM.
♪♪ [ Chanting ]
THE MOST IMPORTANT NEW BELIEF
WAS AN ANSWER TO
THE GREAT QUESTION...
OF WHY HUMAN BEINGS
SHOULD BE GOOD.
FOR IN
THE SECOND CENTURY B.C.,
SOME JEWS BEGAN TO BELIEVE
THAT THE DEAD...
WOULD ONE DAY
BE RESURRECTED AND JUDGED,
WITH THE GOOD SENT TO HEAVEN
AND THE EVIL TO HELL.
THOSE WHO EMBRACED THIS BELIEF
POINTED TO THE BRIEF HINTS
IN THE BIBLE...
ABOUT AN AFTERLIFE
AS PROOF.
[ Kugel ] AT THIS POINT
IN JEWISH HISTORY, I THINK
PEOPLE BEGAN TO LOOK MORE...
AND MORE TO THE AFTERLIFE
AS A KIND OF PLACE
OF FINAL RECKONING.
IT WILL BE IN THE WORLD TO COME
THAT THESE ACCOUNTS
WILL BE SETTLED.
AND SO THEY TURNED TO SCRIPTURE
IN ORDER TO FIND SUPPORT
FOR THIS IDEA,
AND, OF COURSE,
SUPPORT WAS NOT LACKING.
[ Narror ]
THE BELIEF THAT THE BIBLE
WAS INSPIRED BY GOD...
ALSO GAVE RISE TO GREAT INTEREST
IN ITS PROPHECIES
ABOUT EARTHLY EVENTS.
THE MOST INFLUENTIAL PROPHECY
OF ALL...
WAS THAT A TIME OF TURMOIL
WAS COMING,
AND DURING IT,
GOD WOULD STAND BY THOSE WHO,
LIKE THE PATRIARCHS OF OLD,
STOOD BY THE COVENANT.
THESE NEW WAYS
OF UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLE...
NOT ONLY TRANSFORMED JUDAISM,
THEY PREPARED IT
FOR A WAR OF SURVIVAL.
AFTER THE DEATH
OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT,
A NEW GREEK DYNASTY CALLED
THE SELEUCIDS SEIZED CONTROL
OF THE MIDDLE EAST.
THE FIRST OF THE SELEUCID KINGS
WERE CONTENT TO
LET GREEK CULTURE...
GRADUALLY
TRANSFORM THEIR SUBJECTS
INTO GREEKS.
BUT IN 185 B.C.,
A VERY UNUSUAL MAN
ASCENDED TO THE SELEUCID THRONE.
HE WAS ANTIOCHUS IV.
BUT HE WAS KNOWN
TO HIS SUBJECTS...
AS ANTIOCHUS THE MADMAN.
ONE OF ANTIOCHUS'S
FIRST DECREES, RECORDED
IN THE BOOK OF MACCABEES,
DEMANDED THAT
ALL HIS SUBJECTS REPLACE
THEIR ANCESTRAL TRADITIONS...
WITH GREEK ONES.
[ Man ]
THE KING ISSUED A PROCLAMATION
TO HIS WHOLE KINGDOM...
THAT ALL WERE TO
BECOME A SINGLE PEOPLE,
EACH RENOUNCING
HIS PARTICULAR CUSTOMS.
MANY PEOPLES
OF THE REGION HAD ALREADY
ADOPTED THE GREEK WAY OF LIFE,
BUT NOT DEVOUT JEWS.
NOW THEY WOULD BE FACED
WITH A CHOICE:
GIVE UP THEIR FAITH...
OR FIGHT TO DEFEND IT.
ANTIOCHUS RELIED AT FIRST
ON A FACTION OF JEWS...
WHO HAD
EMBRACED ALL THINGS GREEK.
TO INCREASE THEIR INFLUENCE,
HE SOLD ONE SUCH JEW...
THE MOST IMPORTANT JOB
IN JERUSALEM:
HIGH PRIEST OF THE TEMPLE.
[ Man ] JASON
USURPED THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD
BY GIVING ANTIOCHUS A PROMISE...
OF 360 TALENTS OF SILVER.
AS SOON AS HE WAS IN POWER,
JASON SET ABOUT...
CONVERTING HIS FELLOW COUNTRYMEN
TO THE GREEK WAY OF LIFE.
[ Gafni ]
FOR A HIGH PRIEST IN JERUSALEM
IN THE SECOND CENTURY,
THE QUESTION WAS QUITE SIMPLE:
DO I JUMP ON THE GREEK BANDWAGON
OR NOT?
DO I REMAIN SEPARATE,
OR DO I THROW MY LOT IN
WITH A SOCIAL PROCESS...
THAT HAD TAKEN OVER ALL
OF THE MIDDLE EAST AT THIS TIME?
WE FIND HIGH PRIESTS
THAT WERE WILLING TO
TAKE THAT EXTRA STEP...
AND TO THROW THEIR LOT IN
WITH THE LOT OF ANTIOCHUS IV,
EPIPHANIES.
THIS WOULD CREATE A REACTION,
A VIOLENT REACTION,
BECAUSE THERE WERE JEWS
WHO CONSIDERED THIS
TO BE NOTHING LESS THAN HERESY.
[ Narrator ] CIRCUMCISION
WAS THE ULTIMATE SYMBOL
MARKING A MAN AS A JEW.
BUT UNDER THE NEW HIGH PRIEST,
MANY TEMPLE PRIESTS...
BEGAN HAVING COSMETIC SURGERY
TO DISGUISE
THEIR CIRCUMCISIONS...
SO THEY COULD
TAKE PART NAKED
IN THE GREEK GAMES.
[ Man ]
THE HELLENIZING PROCESS
REACHED SUCH A PITCH...
THAT THE PRIESTS CEASED
TO SHOW ANY INTEREST
IN THE SERVICES OF THE ALTAR.
THEY WOULD HURRY TO TAKE PART
AS SOON AS THE SIGNAL
WAS GIVEN FOR THE GAMES.
[ Schiffman ]
THERE WERE CERTAIN THINGS
ABOUT GREEK CULTURE...
AND CIVILIZATION
THAT WERE TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE
TO THE JEWS.
AMONG THESE, OF COURSE,
WAS THE RELIGIOUS CONCEPT
OF A MULTIPLICITY OF GODS.
YOU CANNOT POSSIBLY IMAGINE
SUCH A THING AS BEING ACCEPTABLE
TO JEWS.
ALSO, THERE WERE CERTAIN KINDS
OF BEHAVIOR. FOR EXAMPLE,
THE GYMNASIUM,
WITH NAKED ATHLETICS.
BUT REALLY BEHIND THAT
ISN'T SO MUCH THE NAKEDNESS...
AS THE VIRTUAL WORSHIP
OF THE HUMAN BODY.
THESE TYPES OF CONCEPTS,
THEOLOGICAL, AND WE MIGHT SAY,
BEHAVIORAL,
WERE JUST
TOTALLY UNACCEPTABLE
TO MOST JEWS.
[ Narrator ] ACCORDING TO
THE BOOK OF MACCABEES, THE
ULTIMATE INSULT TO THE JEWS...
CAME WHEN ANTIOCHUS ORDERED
THAT THE HEART AND SOUL
OF JUDAISM,
THE TEMPLE IN JERUSALEM,
BE TRANSFORMED
INTO A GREEK TEMPLE.
[ Man ]
THE KING SENT A MAN
TO COMPEL THE JEWS...
TO PROFANE THE TEMPLE
IN JERUSALEM AND DEDICATE IT
TO THE OLYMPIAN ZEUS.
THE TEMPLE WAS FILLED
WITH REVELING AND DEBAUCHERY
BY THE PAGANS,
WHO TOOK THEIR PLEASURE
WITH PROSTITUTES AND
HAD INTERCOURSE WITH WOMEN...
IN THE SACRED PRECINCTS.
[ Chattering ]
[ Narrator ]
THE UPRISING AGAINST ANTIOCHUS
BEGAN IN THE COUNTRYSIDE,
FOR THE KING HAD
ORDERED HIS MEN TO TRAVEL
FROM VILLAGE TO VILLAGE...
WITH AN IDOL OF ZEUS.
[ Man ]
THE KING'S COMMISSIONERS
CAME TO THE TOWN OF MODEIN...
TO MAKE THEM SACRIFICE.
MANY ISRAELITES GATHERED
AROUND THEM, BUT MATTATHIAS
AND HIS SONS DREW APART.
[ Man Speaking, Indistinct ]
THE KING'S COMMISSIONERS THEN
ADDRESSED MATTATHIAS:
"YOU ARE A RESPECTED LEADER,
"A GREAT MAN IN THIS TOWN.
"BE THE FIRST TO STEP FORWARD
AND OBEY THE KING'S DECREE.
"YOU AND YOUR SONS SHALL BE
HONORED WITH GOLD AND SILVER...
AND MANY PRESENTS."
RAISING HIS VOICE,
MATTATHIAS RETORTED,
"EVEN IF EVERY NATION
LIVING IN THE KING'S DOMINION
OBEYS HIM,
"I, MY SONS AND MY BROTHERS...
WILL STILL FOLLOW THE COVENANT
OF OUR ANCESTORS."
AS HE FINISHED SPEAKING,
A JEW CAME FORWARD
IN THE SIGHT OF ALL...
TO OFFER SACRIFICE
ON THE ALTAR.
WHEN MATTATHIAS SAW THIS,
HE WAS FIRED WITH ZEAL.
HE KILLED
THE KING'S COMMISSIONERS...
AND TORE DOWN THE ALTAR.
THEN HE FLED WITH HIS SONS
INTO THE HILLS.
[ Narrator ]
MATTATHIAS AND HIS SONS
WOULD SOON BECOME KNOWN...
AS THE MACCABEES.
THEIR UPRISING WAS PROOF
THAT THE JEWS' COMMITMENT...
TO THE RELIGION
OF THE DIVINE BOOK
HAD BECOME SO STRONG,
THEY WOULD DIE
TO DEFEND IT.
[ Cohen ] THE MACCABEES
WENT TO WAR TO PUT AN END
TO THE RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION,
TO RECLAIM THE TEMPLE
TO PURIFY IT.
IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD,
THIS IS THE VERY FIRST WAR
THAT WE KNOW OF...
THAT PEOPLE WENT TO WAR
OVER RELIGIOUS FREEDOM,
OR FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME
THE STATE TAMPERED
WITH A RELIGIOUS TRADITION,
WHICH RESULTED
IN THE PEOPLE SAYING, "NO.
WE WILL GO TO FIGHT.
WE CANNOT TOLERATE THIS." THAT
IS THE WAR OF THE MACCABEES.
[ Narrator ]
MANY OF THE MACCABEAN REBELS HID
IN CAVES IN THE COUNTRYSIDE...
TO AVOID ANTIOCHUS'S ARMY.
NOT ONLY
WERE THEY GREATLY OUTNUMBERED;
THEY FACED THE SERIOUS HANDICAP
OF HAVING TO FIGHT...
ACCORDING TO BIBLICAL LAW.
THE BIBLE SAID IT WAS ILLEGAL
TO FIGHT ON THE SABBATH DAY.
SO WHEN THE GREEKS TRIED
TO SMOKE OUT A LARGE GROUP
OF REBELS DURING SABBATH,
THE REBELS DECIDED
THEY WOULD RATHER DIE...
AND SEEK THEIR REWARD
IN THE NEXT LIFE...
THAN BREAK GOD'S LAW.
[ Man ]
THEY OFFERED NO OPPOSITION.
NOT A STONE WAS THROWN.
THERE WAS NO BARRICADING
OF THE HIDING PLACES.
THEY ONLY SAID,
"LET US ALL DIE INNOCENT.
"LET HEAVEN AND EARTH
BEAR WITNESS THAT YOU ARE
MASSACRING US...
WITH NO PRETENSE OF JUSTICE."
THE ATTACK WAS PRESSED HOME
ON THE SABBATH ITSELF,
AND THEY WERE SLAUGHTERED,
WITH THEIR WIVES
AND CHILDREN,
TO THE NUMBER
OF 1,000 PERSONS.
[ Gafni ]
THIS INTRODUCES
THE ISSUE OF MARTYRDOM...
FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN SOMETHING
OF A SYSTEMATIC WAY.
WE HEAR OF JEWS, FOR INSTANCE,
REFUSING TO FIGHT
ON THE SABBATH,
AND THEY ARE MARTYRED.
THE MACCABEAN UPRISING, THEN,
NOT ONLY BECAME
THE CLASSIC EXAMPLE...
OF JEWS FIGHTING FOR
THEIR RELIGION, BUT IT BECAME
THE FIRST CLASSIC EXAMPLE...
OF JEWS WILLING TO DIE
FOR THEIR RELIGION.
[ Narrator ]
BUT AFTER THE MASSACRES,
THE SURVIVING REBELS DECIDED
TO RECONSIDER THE MATTER
OF SABBATH OBSERVANCE.
AND THE UNCERTAINTY THAT EXISTED
OVER THE BIBLE'S MEANING...
GAVE THEM THE FREEDOM
THEY NEEDED.
[ Man ] THEY SAID
TO ONE ANOTHER, "IF WE ALL DO
AS OUR BROTHERS HAVE DONE...
AND REFUSE TO FIGHT, THEY WILL
ONLY DESTROY US THE SOONER
FROM THE EARTH."
SO THEN AND THERE,
THEY CAME TO THIS DECISION:
"IF ANYONE ATTACKS US
ON THE SABBATH DAY,
WE WILL RESIST THEM.
WE MUST NOT ALL BE KILLED
AS OUR BROTHERS WERE
IN THE HIDING PLACES."
[ Schiffman ]
THE MACCABEES RULED, AND IT
SEEMS TO HAVE BEEN FOLLOWED...
BY JEWISH TRADITION
FOREVER AFTER THAT
IN A DEFENSIVE WAR,
ONE NOT ONLY WAS PERMITTED TO
SET ASIDE SABBATH RESTRICTIONS,
BUT ONE WAS OBLIGATED
TO DO SO.
[ Narrator ]
AFTER THE DEATH OF MATTATHIAS,
HIS SON JUDAH...
TOOK OVER THE LEADERSHIP
OF THE REBELS.
JUDAH WAS BOTH
A BRILLIANT MILITARY STRATEGIST
AND A CHARISMATIC LEADER...
WHO USIBLE TO
INSPIRE HIS FOLLOWERS.
[ Man ] FIRST LIGHT
FOUND JUDAH PREPARING
FOR BATTLE IN THE PLAIN.
THOUGH HIS MEN
LACKED THE ARMOR AND SWORDS
THEY COULD'VE WISHED,
JUDAH SAID TO HIS MEN,
"DO NOT BE AFRAID
OF THEIR NUMBERS...
"AND DO NOT FLINCH
AT THEIR ATTACK.
"REMEMBER HOW OUR ANCESTORS
WERE DELIVERED
AT THE RED SEA...
"REMEMBER HOW OUR ANCESTORS
WHEN PHARAOHED
WAS PURSUING THEM IN FORCE."
- [ Men Shouting, Grunting ]
-THE FOREIGNERS LOOKED UP AND,
SEEING THE JEWS...
JUDAH'S MEN SOUNDED THE TRUMPET
AND ENGAGED THEM.
THE PAGANS WERE ROUTED
AND FLED TOWARD THE PLAIN,
AND ALL THE STRAGGLERS
FELL BY THE SWORD.
[ Narrator ]
AFTER A STRING OF VICTORIES
OVER THE GREEKS,
JUDAH'S MEN BEGAN
TO CALL HIM JUDAH THE MACCABEE,
JUDAH THE HAMMER.
[ Gafni ]
JUDAH MACCABEE IS SOME KIND
OF AMAZING, GIANT FIGURE...
IN OUR HISTORICAL TRADITION.
HERE YOU'VE GOT THIS MAN
WHO RISES UP...
AGAINST
THE UNBELIEVABLE POWER
OF THE SELEUCID EMPIRE,
WHO FIGHTS BATTLES
WITH MASSIVE ARMIES...
AND WHO STANDS,
ON THE ONE HAND,
FOR TORAH AND TRADITION,
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND,
KNOWS HOW TO MAKE DEALS
WITH THE ROMANS...
AND HOW TO FIGHT
AGAINST THE SELEUCIDS.
SO WE ARE SPEAKING HERE
ABOUT SOMEONE WHO MUST HAVE...
BEEN LITERALLY A GIANT
IN HIS OWN TIME.
[ Narrator ]
IN 164 B.C., THREE YEARS
AFTER THE REVOLT BEGAN,
THE MACCABEES
FINALLY CONQUERED JERUSALEM.
THEIR FIRST OFFICIAL ACT WAS
TO REMOVE ALL GREEK INFLUENCE
FROM THE TEMPLE...
AND REDEDICATE IT
TO THEIR ONE TRUE GOD.
MACCABEUS
AND HIS COMPANIONS RESTORED
THE TEMPLE AND THE CITY.
THEY PURIFIED THE SANCTUARY
AND BUILT A NEW ALTAR.
[ Men Chanting ]
THEN, STRIKING FIRE
FROM FLINTS,
THEY OFFERED THE FIRST SACRIFICE
FOR TWO YEARS...
[ Sheep Bleating ]
AND BURNED INCENSE
AND LIT THE LAMPS.
[ Man Reciting Prayer ]
[ Gafni ] JUDAH MACCABEE
WILL ENTER THE CITY. HE WILL
HAVE TO PURIFY THE TEMPLE...
BECAUSE THE TEMPLE HAD GONE
THROUGH A PROCESS
OF HELLENIZATION.
PAGAN RITES HAD BEEN
INTRODUCED INTO THE TEMPLE,
AND JUDAH MACCABEE
WOULD PURIFY,
REDEDICATE THE TEMPLE.
THIS, OF COURSE,
LEADING TO THE RENOWNED FESTIVAL
OF HANUKKAH,
THE DEDICATION
OF THE JEWISH TEMPLE ANEW.
[ Narrator ] FOR ALL OF
THE PORTRAYAL OF HANUKKAH AS A
TRIUMPHANT MOMENT OF VICTORY...
IT WAS,
UNFORTUNATELY FOR THE MACCABEES,
NOT WHERE THE STORY ENDED.
ANTIOCHUS'S TROOPS
SOON COUNTERATTACKED...
AND DEALT THE REBELS
A CRUSHING BLOW BY
KILLING JUDAH MACCABEE.
[ Man ]
ALL ISRAEL WEPT
AND MOURNED HIM DEEPLY...
AND FOR MANY DAYS,
THEY REPEATED THIS DIRGE:
"WHAT A DOWNFALL
FOR THE STRONG MAN...
THE MAN WHO KEPT ISRAEL SAFE."
[ Schiffman ] THERE ARE TWO WAYS
OF LOOKING AT THIS QUESTION OF
WHETHER THE MACCABEES WON...
BECAUSE THE SELEUCIDS CAME BACK
AND KICKED THEM OUT.
SO APPARENTLY THIS THING
THAT WE CELEBRATE ON HANUKKAH
IS NOT REALLY THE FINAL VICTORY.
[ Narrator ]
IN THE TRUE STORY
OF THE MACCABEES,
IT WAS NOT MILITARY MIGHT
THAT ULTIMATELY WON THE DAY,
BUT POLITICS AND NEGOTIATIONS.
AFTER JUDAH'S DEATH,
HIS BROTHER JONATHAN TOOK
OVER LEADERSHIP OF THE REBELS.
BY 152 B.C.,
JONATHAN HAD 10,000 SOLDIERS
UNDER HIS COMMAND.
BUT INSTEAD
OF STARTING A NEW WAR,
JONATHAN
MADE A BARGAIN WITH ONE
OF TWO GREEK GENERALS...
WHO WERE
FIGHTING FOR CONTROL
OF THE SELEUCID EMPIRE.
THERE WERE TWO PRETENDERS
TO THE SELEUCID THRONE...
COMPETING FOR THE RULE
OF SYRIA.
JONATHAN SHREWDLY
THREW HIS WEIGHT
AND HIS SOLDIERS...
BEHIND THE WEAKER,
GETTING IN RETURN
AN AGREEMENT...
THAT HE WOULD BE HIGH PRIEST
AND RULER OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE.
[ Narrator ]
JONATHAN'S BARGAIN
WAS SUCCESSFUL.
JUDEA WAS INDEPENDENT
FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE THE DYNASTY OF KING DAVID.
THE REIGN OF THE MACCABEES
BROUGHT A SENSE OF RENEWAL
TO JUDEA.
THOSE JEWS WHO LOOKED
TO THEIR DIVINE BOOK
TO UNDERSTAND THE WORLD...
DREW PARTICULAR ENCOURAGEMENT.
FOR THEM, THE MACCABEES' VICTORY
AGAINST OVERWHELMING ODDS...
WAS PROOF OF THE BIBLE'S PROMISE
THAT GOD WOULD COME
TO THE AID...
OF THOSE WHO WERE WILLING
TO FIGHT FOR THEIR FAITH.
[ Gafni ]
THE MEANING THAT WAS ATTACHED
TO HANUKKAH WAS OBVIOUS--
THAT IF ONE IS
FIGHTING A RIGHTEOUS WAR,
THE FEW CAN DEFEAT THE MANY,
THE RIGHTEOUS
CAN DEFEAT THE WICKED.
THIS BECOMES A MAINSTAY,
NOT ONLY IN JEWISH TRADITION,
I WOULD SAY,
BUT IN
JUDEO-CHRISTIAN TRADITION,
THE IDEA THAT ONE OUGHT
TO BE WILLING TO DIE
FOR ONE'S BELIEF-- MARTYRDOM.
AND CLEARLY THE STEADFASTNESS.
I THINK THE WORD
IS ALMOST ZEALOTRY.
IN FACT, THE BOOK OF MACCABEE
ALMOST PLAYS ON THIS IDEA,
THAT ONE SHOULD BE ZEALOUS
FOR THE LAW AND GOD COMES
TO THE AID...
OF THOSE WHO ARE ZEALOUS
FOR THE LAW.
[ Narrator ]
THIS CONVICTION THAT THE FATE
OF THE JEWS DEPENDED...
ON DEFENDING GOD'S LAWS
AT ALL COSTS...
WOULD ONLY GROW
IN THE YEARS AHEAD.
AND IT WOULD SET THE STAGE
FOR A TRUE CATACLYSM...
WHEN ANOTHER GREAT EMPIRE
ARRIVED IN THE MIDDLE EAST:
THE ROMANS.